The Project Gutenberg EBook of Zion, by Johannes R. Becher

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: Zion
       Gedichte

Author: Johannes R. Becher

Release Date: June 19, 2016 [EBook #52372]

Language: German

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ZION ***




Produced by Jens Sadowski and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






                          JOHANNES R. BECHER




                                 ZION


                               GEDICHTE




                      KURT WOLFF VERLAG MÜNCHEN




                  BÜCHEREI »DER JÜNGSTE TAG« BAND 82

                 GEDRUCKT BEI E. HABERLAND IN LEIPZIG




                     GESCHRIEBEN JENA HERBST 1918

            COPYRIGHT 1920 BY KURT WOLFF VERLAG IN MÜNCHEN




   Tausend schmolzen in Stankgruben und Tausend
   Klaffen im Herbst, starben im sanglosen Wald.
   Manchmal weiß man, dort wandelt Frühling.
   Doch einer nimmt es hinweg ...
   Und Andere stehn für die Anderen auf.







                        INSEL DER VERHEISSUNG





   Ich habe Heimweh unbeschreiblich.
   Von Tränen ist der Blick verhängt.
   Ich fühle fern mich, süß und weiblich.
   Von Himmelssternen ganz versengt.

   Ich habe manchen Mensch durchtastet.
   Und schlief auf manchem Winter-Platz.
   Doch niemals hab ich recht gerastet.
   Du Blut-Herz bliebst der einzige Schatz.

   Und noch der Sonn-Frucht Köstlichkeit.
   Monds Segel-Wiege: Aller Stirne.
   Mein armer Tag sei euch geweiht.
   Zypressen ragen steil zu Firnen.




   Aus Schrift-Gelenken, magisch und verzückt,
   Voll Wiesen-Weichheit, ewige Nacht enthaltend --
   Hat dich zum erstenmal im Herbst erblickt
   Der Dichter, frei der höllischen Gewalten.

   Ein Engel du aus Himmeln abgeschickt:
   Zu dir empor sich seine Wesen falten.
   Der Baum dient dir. Dir schmölz sein Erz-Genick.
   Und während rings die Räume jetzt erkalten,

   Ein Nebel durchs Gemäuer schimmelnd frißt:
   Erhebst du dich voll Strahlgesang lobtönend,
   So äolssüß, daß dich kein Traum vergißt. --

   Du trägst der Tage Hoheit, Dorn und Bürde.
   Doch Hyazinthen-Abend füllt dich ganz.
   Und steigst! Von Sternen-Faltern jungfräulichst Umschwirrte.




   Du trägst sie wie ein Lamm. Und deine Beule
   Benetzt sie wie des Himmels blanker Baum.
   Dein Schimmelmond zerschmilzt. Und Trank der Fäulnis
   Vergoldet sich nektarisch dir im Traum.

   Fabriken flöten, die sonst elend heulten.
   Madonna öffnet sich im finsteren Raum.
   Es _steht_ der Sonne Strahl. Enorme Säule
   Auf deines Herzens Basis. Flimmernd kaum.

   Zerflockt die Phalanx erzenster Gewitter.
   Auch Gnaden-Schnee träuft in die Wunden ein.
   Zinnoberer Mittag schwöll vom Sang der Schnitter.

   Doch Rosen-Nacht fängt die Geliebten ein.
   Sie bluten aus. Fortschwingend in der Meere
   Korallen-Wildnis durchs Gestein zur Sphäre.




   Du bist es, die der Felsen Nacktheit mildert,
   Die mich Verworfenen in ein Ewiges zieht.
   Die vielfach abgewandelt süß der Dichter schildert.
   Am Schluß der Aufschwung kühlen Sphärenlieds.

   Der blanke Vogel über ödem Ried.
   Im Glorien-Strahl, der durchs Gewölke filtert
   Die Enzian-Wiese -- seliger Mondtraum glüht --,
   Wo Gießbach peitschend durch Gerölle wildert.

   Ja tausend Städte nach dir abgegriffen --
   Phantastische Länder weit um dich befragt ...
   Nun zög ich kühn gen dich auf Schwermut-Schiffen.

   Und Bajonette steil für dich geschliffen.
   Bis rings entzündet durch Giftdämpfe vag
   Aus Gottes Antlitz stürzt dein Sternentag.




   Zypressen-Nacht, durchflutet von Laternen.
   Bald löscht ein Schlaf dich Mensch in Schmerzen aus.
   Wirst du Geliebte meinen Traum durchsternen.
   Und trittst du ein in mein verlassenes Haus?!

   Ich kann mich nicht mehr in den Bäumen halten.
   Ich schwinde. Ich versinke. Ohne Rest.
   Die ewigen Sphären über uns erkalten.
   Im Krampf die Hände um die Brust gepreßt.

   Wo wurzelst du?! Ein Hauf. Verstört im Winde.
   Hah blutige Donner stürzend dich in Nacht.
   Der gute Traum: die Mutter mit dem Kinde.
   Und mit Musik zum hellen Tag erwacht.

   Wir sind geboren in der Nacht der Wälder.
   Morast und Moor ward uns zu Aug und Haar.
   Die Wangen Mohn. Und Stirn: zerfurchte Felder.
   An Hügel Lippen glüht Gott wunderbar.

   Wir liebend ungemein. Ob auch Geliebte?!
   Wir schlugen an. Es tönt. Und Abend neigt --
   Dein Wimpern-Mond erlöse uns Betrübte!
   Dein Lied schwing auf, wenn dicht uns Tod umschweigt!




   Du Süd-Olive. Haupt aus Mond Frucht. Wiese
   Die Wange mit zerschmolzenem Himmelsstern.
   Ich --: Panthervieh! Und stampfend! Finsterer Riese.
   Der schmiß in Trümmer euere Welten gern.

   Der löscht mit Feuer aus die Fäulniszeiten.
   »... In dein Gehirn, o Mensch, den spitzen Blitz.«
   Du wirst wohl unterm Kokusbaum bereiten
   Ihm ewigen Schlaf. Den nicht Gewalt durchhitzt.

   Den Traum der Götter. Schau der Pyramiden.
   Olymp dem Aug. Durch seine Adern Nil.
   Schon atmet weich er. Krasser Tat geschieden.
   Betaut die Stirn. Laub in den Haaren viel.




   Du wardst zum Menschen so voll Traurigkeit,
   Daß du nicht schlafen kannst.
   Immer schwebst du mir im Gedächtnis ...
   Daß ich nicht schlafen kann --
   Daß ich nur wachen kann --
   Daß ich nur warten kann --
   Wann, o wann?!




                                HERBST
                             VERWANDLUNG




                                HERBST


   Die Nebelnacht beginnt. Und Fenster glosen.
   Ein Zug durchwindet diesen Raum mit Schrei.
   Und Menschen-Mächte durch die Straßen stoßen.
   Der Himmel Finsternis stürzt grell entzwei.

   Da treibt der Dampf empor aus brüchiger Erde.
   Mit Schimmel füllt die Luft sich, Fäulnis voll.
   Auf Brückenmonden stehn die Traum-Verklärten,
   Gespenster-Fratzen. Blökend. Hundetoll.

   Wo unten ziehend falbere Mädchen-Sippen.
   Verfluchter Kerl im stinkichten Pissoir.
   Doch ungeheuer zackt ihr Häuser-Klippen
   Phantastisch auf, im bunteren Talar

   Gigantischer Plakate: Apotheosen
   Des viehischen Instinkts. Gelobt der Christ!
   Revolver-Mann in weiten Schlotter-Hosen.
   Und Fäulnis-Schaum durch die Gelenke frißt.

   ... Herbst uns verhaßt. Wir wünschten hellere Stürme.
   Verfall hat ausgetrumpft. Man zielt nach Lust.
   Nach Wetter-Zorn. Nach Blitz und Blau. Nach Türmen.
   Nach Muskel-Hügel. Nach Athleten Brust.

   Nach blankem Satz. Geschliffenstem Wort. Perioden,
   Die magisch platzten. Aufruf. Endlichst --: Tat!
   Du Herbst lösch aus in unseren Frühlings-Oden.
   Die Sonne wirbelt groß ob unserem Pfad.




                             VERWANDLUNG


   Straße im Grund beschwankt von den Früchten der Sterne.
   Lila-Regen durchstreifend Milch-Antlitze quer.
   Mit dem Monde vertauschtest dein Aug du ach gerne.
   Aus den Pausen der Buchten du stießest ins brüllende Meer.

   Heros! Und Geifer klatscht rings dir zu Hüften jetzt wild.
   Charybdis und Scylla. Zerstampfer heiligen Gefilds.
   Saaten faulen. Schon brennt der ätherische Raum.
   Flammen-Schnee durchrast eueren Traum.

   Ha --: ockernes Geläut! da Köpfe stoßen
   In der Asphalte tiefsten Höllen-Brei.
   Ha --: Wirbel-Beine. Schwirrend ... Blätter-Hosen.
   Die Häuser platzen lautlos oft entzwei.

   Die Pyramide zeigt sich wieder.
   Und plötzlich stürzt zinnoberer Himmel Nil
   In alle ein. Neu formt sich jeder wieder
   Im Schoß der Sphinx --: ein heiliges Krokodil.




                                 ZION


   Die Reiche blühen bunt in ihren Arten.
   Du bist vermischt, o Volk. Doch tief im Ziel.
   Die mondene Zeder schweift im ewigen Garten.
   Und Halleluja rauscht der Enggescharten.
   Gold-Sinai ob schluchtenem Gewühl. --
   Die Reiche blühen bunt in ihren Arten.

   O welch Geglänze in den heiligen Städten.
   Der Tempel steigt. Des Gottes irdisch Zelt.
   Du zogst, o Volk, aus höllischen Gefretten.
   Dein David riß dich aus Philisterketten.
   In Harfe Jonathans das Sternlied fällt.
   O welch Geglänze in den heiligen Städten.

   Du Strom ins Meer. Hier treibst du friedsam ankernd.
   Die Mutter breitet sich, scharlachene Bucht.
   Die Eselinnen rasten, heiß bedankte.
   Und Jeremia ruht, der blitzumrankte.
   Nur Baalschem tönt, voll hymnisch reinster Wucht.

   Ekstasen der Propheten. Kamm der Kreuze.
   Gethsemane enthüllt in düstrer Nacht.
   Nun quillt die Erde über eures Weizens.
   Und Zions Töchter blühn in dunklen Reizen:
   Der Erde Runde stürzt! an ihrer Macht.
   Ekstasen der Propheten. Kamm der Kreuze.

   Dein Blut ist gramverdunkelt. Welche Toten.
   Und Hiobs Leib und Beilis bittrer Stamm.
   Wenn deine Stätten auch zerstampft vermodern --:
   Die Psalter zeugen. Und Geburten lodern.
   In aller Herzen zieht dein Osterlamm.

   Gewaltiges Volk! Gehirn du in Millionen!
   Du wandelst dich in Tat erhabener Geist.
   Und im Gericht ersiegten nur Gerechte.
   Verfolgt. Zersplittert. Stern singt ob Pogromen.
   Die Demut ists, die stets dich neu beweist.
   Nation der Unverfälschten und der Echten.

   Und Schwung und Stoß ins Herz der scheu Verarmten!
   Nun sprießt das Reis. Es grünt dein Schulterblatt.
   O Heimat der Idee. Bewogte Küste.
   Die fernsten Kreaturen süß umarmte.
   Jerusalem die Frucht gemundet hat.
   Es träumt dein Hirt, als ob er nie mehr wüßte.

   Gewaltiges Volk! Sturmschwinge der Bekenner,
   Der Himmelsspringer und der Flammenrenner ...
   O Zion! Deine Fessel bricht.
   Der Tag blitzt jäh in deine welken Glieder.
   Der Erde Völker schluchzen vor dir nieder,
   Wild netzend dein Gesicht.

   Und deine Narben, deine Klumpen Füße.
   Und die Verfemten senden ihre Grüße.
   Und auferstehn in deiner Pauken Schwall.
   Die Zimbeln rasen durch die Dämmerungen.
   Aus Horizonten, knallend aufgesprungen,
   Ob Gibeons Tal dreht Sonne jung uralt.

   ... Ja Völker schluchzen dir. Du die Vertraute
   Des großen Schmerzes. Rotes Wundenmeer.
   Zerschlagen und zermalmt im Nesselkraute.
   Verstopft von Fäulnis. Eklen Gifts umbraute.
   Quer deine Lenden Hageldorn und Speer.

   Ja Völker schluchzen dir. An tausend Enden
   Geschnürt, verstriemt und mit dem Wahn verstrickt.
   Aasfliegen überwuchern deine Hände.
   Und deine Wangen, Zion --: Faltenwände ...
   Doch Zukunft! Zion sprüht dein Blick.

   So schluchzen Völker dir. Du beugst die Tische
   Mit ungesalznem Brot und ewigem Krug.
   Durch Lüfte flattern deine Wunderfische.
   Verschränkte Freunde singen in den Nischen.
   O deine Ernte aller Welt genug.

   So schluchzen Völker dir und danken strömend.
   Der Walfisch sitzt beruhigt im Paradies.
   Aus Gitterschleusen fließen Löwenmähnen.
   Die sanften Hasen spielen mit Hyänen.
   Ein Strahl im Herz des Heiligen der Spieß.

   Du hast befreit. Nun jubeln die Befreiten.
   Und Honigwälder tierhaft aufgebauscht.
   Du ordnest wohl den Krampf der Eingeweide.
   Die starren Wüsten mischen sich beschneiten
   Gebirgen zart im bunten Farbenrausch.

   Du hast befreit. Nun leuchten die Gewitter.
   Methusalem wird zündend aufgebaut.
   Messias weilt in eurem Kreis inmitten.
   Er feuert an die Arbeit guter Schnitter
   Und stillt den Frevel eurer Märkte laut.

   Die du befreit. Durch Tore der Fabriken
   Ziehst ein du Lichteroberer. Morgenland
   Dehnt rings sich weit. Geschundene Gäule nicken
   Und traben heimwärts in geahnten Glücken.
   Und Sodom kniet im Regenbogenbrand.

   Die du befreit. Verlorenen Sohn. Verschollen.
   Dein Vater sucht dich im verquollenen Grund.
   Die greisen Hände silbern tasten wollen ...
   Die Symphonien aller Mütter rollen
   Und hauchen Segen deinem bitteren Mund.

   Und falbe Mägde, elend und gesteinigt,
   Erhöben sich in wunderbarer Tracht.
   Sie schweben auf, erhaben und gereinigt.
   Zu Flammenbündel Straßenwerk vereinigt
   Durchschneidet magisch jede Sphärenpracht.

   Die du befreit. Ja die Natur durchdrungen!
   Granitner Boden Lava aufgewälzt.
   Die Menschen reden in berauschten Zungen.
   In der Arena wird das Vieh bezwungen.
   Ha, rosener Flaum glüht durch die Luft der Fels.

   Steinbrüche züngeln und die Flüsse wandern.
   Auf jeder Stirn statt Dorn ein Feuerbusch.
   Ein jeder schwingt empor beseelt im andern.
   Die Disteln treffen sich mit den Oleandern.
   Dein Enzian kelcht aus der Lawinen Rutsch.

   Der Satan gleitet ab von jenem Hügel,
   Wo er versuchend dir die Länder zeigt.
   Die Gräber explodieren, Knall der Riegel.
   Der Mächtigen Vermächtnis: Bettler schmiegen
   Sich in den Schatten mailichten Gezweigs.

   Die Liebenden verwachsen in den Lauben.
   O Salomon, du greifst dein Hohes Lied.
   Die bleichen Küsse ballen sich zu Trauben.
   Und Mädchenbrüste gurren braune Tauben
   In märchener Hemden blankem Seidenried,

   Ihr weisen Könige, ihr Philosophen!
   Die Kriege schlichtet euer heiliger Spruch.
   Die Dichter schmettern in gewaltigen Strophen
   Und sängen Javeh noch im Turm des Ofens.
   Und zehren auf sich in geheimer Sucht!

   Die Kinder Zions! Flatternde Libellen.
   Die Knospe Gottes. Harzener Geruch.
   Die Kranken tauchen in die jodenen Quellen.
   Die Häute schließen ihre offenen Stellen.
   Du schläfst, Gebieter, Koloß und verrucht.

   Und Isebel, die Hure, tanzt in Sonnen
   Und blättert auf in der Posaunen Stoß.
   Das Rinnsal ihres Sturzes ist zerronnen.
   Ihr arger Schoß ist nun ein Spiel der Brunnen
   Und glänzt geweiht auf allen Plätzen bloß.

   O Israel! o Juda! welche Weise
   Durchwandert nicht dein ewiges Angesicht.
   An eisigen Polen ist dein Freund auf Reisen.
   Den Indianer muß dein Blut durchkreisen.
   Die Krüppel sind in deinem Wesen schlicht.

                   *       *       *       *       *

   Gewaltiges Volk! O Zion! Purpurwelle.
   Kein Damm der steht, von solcher Glut befacht.
   Dich trägt Gesetz, o Zion! Deine Quellen
   Berauschen heulend die verruchte Nacht.
   Rebekka rieselt an den Weideplätzen
   Und Ruth wie Flöte, die die Strengsten neigt.
   Doch durch Tyrannen schmilzt, Erzbrust der Götzen
   Dein Lächeln, Esther, wenn die Schwester schweigt.

   O Zion! Zion! Deine Fesseln schleifen.
   O Zion! Zion! Dein Gemäuer taut.
   O Zion! Zion! Deine Martern reifen.
   O Zion! Zion! Deine Unschuld blaut.
   Jehova glänzt aus deiner Henker Sünde.
   Ein Horn frohlockend: Zion! Zion! ... schon.
   Wie schwöll die Braut. Ihr Muschelschoß im Winde
   Unendlichen Ozons!
   Und ganz der Höhen und der Strahlen Beute.
   Dein endlich Fest. O Zion! Blute auf!
   Die Engel türmen sich. Die Himmelsleiter
   Aus Leib an Leib steigt durch die Wolken auf.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Zion, by Johannes R. Becher

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ZION ***

***** This file should be named 52372-8.txt or 52372-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/2/3/7/52372/

Produced by Jens Sadowski and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

